ايسوسيئيشن فٽبال جي بين الاقوامي فيڊريشن (Fédération Internationale de Football Association، FIFA)ايسوسيئيشن فٽبال، بيچ فٽبال ۽ فٽسال جي هڪ بين الاقوامي ريگيوليٽري گورننگ باڊي آهي. اها 21 مئي 1904ع تي، اسپين، سوئٽزرلينڊ،  بيلجيم، ڊنمارڪ، فرانس، جرمني، هالينڊ ۽ سويڊن جي قومي ايسوسيئيشنن جي بين الاقوامي مقابلي جي نگراني ڪرڻ لاءِ قائم ڪئي وئي هئي. زيورخ، سوئٽزرلينڊ ۾ هيڊڪوارٽر رکندڙ، ان جي ميمبرشپ هاڻي 211 قومي ايسوسيئيشنن تي مشتمل آهي. هن جي ميمبر قومي ايسوسيئيشنن کي لازم آهي ته هنن ڇهن علائقائي ڪنفيڊريشنن؛ آفريڪا ۾ CAF، ايشيا ۾ AFC، يورپ ۾ UEFA، اتر ۽ وچ آمريڪا ۽ ڪيريبين ۾ CONCACAF، اوشينيا ۾ OFC ۽ ڏکڻ آمريڪا ۾ CONMEBOL، مان هڪ جو ميمبر پڻ هجڻ.
FIFA is a sports governing body that organises football events all over the world. FIFA outlines several objectives in its organisational statutes, including growing football internationally, ensuring it is accessible to everyone, and advocating for integrity and fair play. It is responsible for organising and promoting football's major international tournaments, notably the World Cup which began in 1930, and the Women's World Cup which commenced in 1991. Although FIFA does not solely set the laws of the game, that being the responsibility of the International Football Association Board of which FIFA is a member, it applies and enforces the rules across all FIFA competitions. All FIFA tournaments generate revenue from sponsorships; in 2022, FIFA had revenues of over US$5.8 billion, ending the 2019–2022 cycle with a net positive of $1.2 billion, and cash reserves of over $3.9 billion.
Reports by investigative journalists have linked FIFA leadership with corruption, bribery, and vote-rigging related to the election of FIFA president Sepp Blatter and the organisation's decision to award the 2018 and 2022 World Cups to Russia and Qatar, respectively. These allegations led to the indictments of nine high-ranking FIFA officials and five corporate executives by the US Department of Justice on charges including racketeering, wire fraud, and money laundering. On 27 May 2015, several of these officials were arrested by Swiss authorities, who launched a simultaneous but separate criminal investigation into how the organisation awarded the 2018 and 2022 World Cups. Those among these officials who were also indicted in the US are expected to be extradited to face charges there as well.
Many officials were suspended by FIFA's ethics committee including Sepp Blatter and Michel Platini. In early 2017, reports became public about FIFA president Gianni Infantino attempting to prevent the re-elections of both chairmen of the ethics committee, Cornel Borbély and Hans-Joachim Eckert, during the FIFA congress in May 2017. On 9 May 2017, following Infantino's proposal, the FIFA Council decided not to renew the mandates of Borbély and Eckert. Together with the chairmen, 11 of 13 committee members were removed. FIFA has been suspected of corruption regarding the Qatar 2022 FIFA World Cup bid.


== حوالا ==


== ٻاهريان ڳنڍڻا ==
